We are obsessed with the 80s and 90s.
03f7a243eed747b3babff346e6a773f4
It's a nostalgic dream
about an adult world and luxury.
909a021a5fc048169075a75feea90509
When you flip through the catalog with your
inner child's eyes, it's promising.
d4a414fcb2ba483eae76b323dde4b7c9
It was the same spread,
and we were on "decoration".
d6b052e2d56a4294905a3002653bf441
Nordic design has conquered the world
for over a hundred years.
52da03f6d9bb49419ecf5054383752a2
I fell in love immediately.
0f2a2d70adb34bf3813c1ea50f013dca
Any room you put it in becomes: Wow!
2fbc962508bf4eef9c8c56f654378b15
I can't take furniture to heaven.
3988fd86f7494c999e8356b47a7ba334
But what exactly makes
Nordic design enchant–
1204a15aae154412b5940517936c3ed8
–collectors from around the world?
b7a2e1338a0c44d9a206a780137c2101
That wooden sofas and plastic chairs are sold
for fantasy sums internationally?
1417b8355aff428e86aae967a2b71e17
From unpretentious everyday objects to
immortal pop culture icons–
882fc54969494d24ab9fe239242659eb
–seen both in films
and in the world's most exclusive homes.
e5476d04644947efa37314329c802494
This is a series
about a hundred years of Nordic design–
197bea9313ff40fe931559113e326482
–and why it looks the way it does.
9a2271d8d47e49c280b6dc9e21ba5d47
Here in Stockholm there is
the vintage shop Magasin Gauche–
387bf534c1ae46d797c6fdca65c21e47
–run by artist Fiona
Fitzpatrick and stylist Tommie X.
fa2449dda0754282a37d10ca395a3fe1
They have built an aesthetic universe
from the 80s and 90s–
cab35412af5647cd8ef138180295d0db
–and are inspired mainly
by ugly-beautiful and forgotten furniture–
ad46d181f67840e9ab9dab2cb2d26b85
–that no one else wants.
95b923c6fae74ce48bfdcb609a492cf8
This lamp
is very special to us.
8c6d06e3738742b9bfa97faac6841419
Fiona had been looking for it for a long time, and we didn't know
what kind of shade it was for–
d9361788912944ac8dfceceb7fe097c6
–but then we identified it
in an Ikea catalog from the early 90s–
624cda468e774b6fbd967111431af0d0
–and it's called Smog.
e29e093e5db04ce99cfa2da42a9f8572
Then our hunt began for this
shade that is in plastic and not...
58430dd26e8c434293f63b1e2ab4b45b
It looks like opal glass,
but it's plastic.
32aad13ae6cd424d94af2c19402d6f1f
I was so happy
when I found it at a flea market–
ad4b02a09b08474d91555de582388d18
–where someone had put it in thinking it
was a funnel you attach to a cat.
5579509800194f35a1e29d097b6c5100
It was satisfying to put
it together and have it in its entirety.
0be49595349d4e10a45d1a2dbbcb36d5
What I like about the 90s
and Ikea's form then–
ac42aa304c3447a299e69268a0674f27
–is that it's so eclectic.
8aded7afc3e24601a5020de610996aa0
It's too big for a table lamp
and is directed upwards.
d7fe80c76f404ffb80116fce68d59256
There are many question marks, but
it's so beautiful, a statement piece.
53c597b2cb0a4eefbe9f69e61b73396f
Any room you put it in becomes: Wow!
d0a322e3790644ad88189b987f1bb30c
But you can joke and ask
what it would fetch at an auction? 50?
0097dca97dfc47dd8ba248b089e829b7
In the early 80s, a new
design trend emerges, a kind of anti-design.
868f2f22ab4548cd85a371bfaa2f5173
A colorful and playful geometry
that ties into a fairy tale world.
7fd851146c9a4fc3a75516445b6f6dff
Ironic design and steel, rusty
nails and concrete enter the living room.
b30082d2b9b54a67972bd4fa7157536f
The design world changes
to something new, and creates debate.
6d7831a93ee14009a8d16989bed18587
When people can't define it, they become
worried and nervous and then angry.
97a2ff174c4f4923b8b7a165e1eb76ad
But these are not chairs.
56b7b152b6724eba94e3ca71915dd21a
–Are they furniture or art?
–It's a sofa.
6fe6472796724da0b8a31c067b63b4c7
It's important to embrace what is
ugly and use it in design.
688277e7f1e8418aace4f2e705ef3493
–Are your furniture beautiful or ugly?
–What do you think?
86efd20c476f48f18b4ad3d1828e67e4
How does a fresh Swedish student
make furniture into art–
95a1fab1e1f643e7944ae98915a68a2d
–and vitalize
the entire Nordic design world?
c5f6295baf68490fbab4721c4348bc60
Why bury the Scandinavian design heritage?
25b67028267b4624a2f4f0fe4b7e7c85
And how does a party night
in New York–
a784fbfadc634d489f219deabd6e992b
–lead to one of the world's
most popular coffee cups?
bc710355fd0d45efb67f5c752340a124
Today there is a longing
for this era's aesthetics–
227662b277df4f358fa571d62b95f55e
–especially among 80s and 90s people
who look back on their own upbringing.
5e9183791434459fbabc88815a267876
Gauche is born from wanting to get away
from the Swedish minimalism.
69fcf50b441844deaf5f862dcad4fea5
The cold and white. Bleached oak.
9e118d9c662d4f28a0a71bb84a60f1b4
For that, you have been so deeply immersed in
large parts of your upbringing.
82ddf23a378a40b78edf841ffd3cbf1b
And the 80s dream existed
before consciousness was switched on.
7de209b8e6c94ed68cc3ac2a0edfc326
You were a daycare child,
and have since lived in this white.
d2ad3518e9174c65a133a19d4ea6a85a
I like Nordic minimalism
and am proud of it as Swedish–
f79872ced44346fa9acc2e91506f33ed
–but myself would never be able
to decorate so.
cc082d2fbacb4d93b3b419b91684a825
My kryptonite is wood.
8056c9c6942f44858c03683c746c2584
I think it's insulting
to human coolness–
4a2ebe57f7a4423999c3054a0c486ad7
–not to process it more than that,
just sand and oil.
7638db3bee6944979928139844142a76
Look how nice! It's mashed wood–
1d1d0ec2549c4f828ad6e24888e820fa
–that you have cast in glue
and then attached plastic.
4611d93f8dd443d38d15db0de6035c1c
"We are the masters of nature!"
24ec07ce35ff40bebc018029de9df05d
Tommie X and Fiona's collecting
revolves around objects–
ab908932e3c845ad8544cfc64225c1b0
–that are both ugly and beautiful at the same time.
1e7d78cccc234557b416c05379c81b07
We notice how malleable
our brains are for ugly and beautiful.
a732376a5bba4a0fafdab9ce5e9556ac
But then when we succeed in setting it
in the right context, that's the sport...
6592cdbefcf444499199a80788fa6ef3
When the pieces fall into place,
and we can trace the history.
b13b3cdf4f704a119bed99ffc1e1c2bb
In the process, ugly becomes beautiful, and
we have noticed that happens in ourselves.
b98226865c954475bd32900c6c3c0628
Have you thought that we often say:
"Look! How ugly?"
f92758e73d62491ba375440bd359ee33
But we mean that it's
so terribly ugly that it becomes beautiful–
3d9371088f85495f9760a68c5379182e
–and that's just the ugliness we
have discussed that we think is beautiful.
84a2c1d74a534ab3a0f7ab37dd5e176e
If others are here, they look
strangely at us when we enthusiastically say:
69ef7738379c424ea3cb61234621adc3
"Look! How ugly?"
But then it's perfect ugly for us.
c1f03a04779b4543bd0f6c705f53352d
The ugly-beautiful is part
of the postmodern ideology–
ab1729af49dd4daf8ef1768921f2ab05
–where ideals are spectacular
and break against form's A and O.
336a413da00f43b48ec08aa956924764
It's a design world created by play,
irony, and parallel perspectives.
3224becfd2ef46b28d1e24d361e74d61
For example, the Memphis design collective
with colorful and geometric aesthetics–
f202dc299cea4d438d504cc43a111943
–breaks through
at the furniture fair in Milan 1981.
f813eff65e7a44bc9c8120afa3c5074d
When you got sucked in and started liking
80s and 90s it was – Memphis!
4c8610407fce4a069d40aa7fa7002b8a
It's so clear and concrete,
and it's attractive.
3d65d721fc754c6381bcfaeca6b4a4ae
And it's cool that the Memphis group
only existed for a few years–
6bfb1eb4a3af4b35b112f475aea14d2e
–but made an impact that continued into
the 2000s, and now is big again.
2e8f6eb5387b4fab84247dcde508252f
And the foundation is well
that they challenged prevailing conventions.
9a8023e5e54346629ef84745ce18a3c3
What happened in 1981 in Milan and became
a shock and a public success–
f82cc6ba5d5f4491a5ffab0ace7e81d9
–was when an international group
with Ettore Sottsass jr in the lead–
59e2d172afe141a7a16b5c3bc0a607f2
–showed that furniture
could look in a completely different way.
7f7654afbe634a25b38006c0d12f30ea
That design could connect
to a fantasy world, a fairy tale world.
9b09a087b2d24cefb404f2dd1b67fd09
They often mention
Alice in Wonderland–
13a2880a97f440f3b58d3842d95eb17e
–where the teapot is blown up
to new proportions and so on.
e9d2ea84317a4879b3f5af84c9c4db1c
They made bookshelves that didn't look like
bookshelves, but like sculptures.
7c619f11e5d84c4eb7427855abde9b06
It was a game–
fc073cf877474c63ad043e030b05c567
–that then inspired many
designers in the entire Western world.
42b1c6e95a0c4f62b57e61e8eea0bf3b
One of the most exclusive objects
in Tommie X and Fiona's collection–
4c90a21656a044df987fd6e60ee7890f
–is the table Concrete by Jonas Bohlin–
dc35323d0926493aa78c0660c2374e7a
–which Fiona bought
under somewhat "unusual" circumstances.
a846bcb50b134162808ea713a3f81deb
I bought Jonas Bohlin's Concrete table
when I was in Ibiza and was drunk.
4c44ca46a11a4a25a69a2c331ade9097
I bid it home to our new local
as the new conference table.
8dc7cf1a4f5547f089bbc91ca81685af
It's so heavy,
so I thought it was enormous.
583d8941fa3d406c8a885bc5652d01b5
–But it's because it's concrete.
–And cast iron and glass.
d419666b158041489f9e486bca56fa82
And it's a contrast to all
the other colorful we like.
1ef12dc7e3c3493aa6e40d5eeb645ff7
But it's still challenging
against how a table should look.
4209d67e45bc4ec2bebf476c710d9fa1
When Jonas Bohlin's chair Concrete came,
it made the design world shake.
a500b19f20b24a1883ff81ea976c2f48
It was made of concrete and iron,
and not a bit ergonomic.
c91328985f6c438f86b9dac9877cacdf
Was it even a chair
or more of an art object?
2b7f889de54b4b328e2822f09eec4545
The concrete chair was an attack on
the Swedish Furniture Institute's norms–
6ae3281fe9964cfabe6fb8e09d35d815
–about how a comfortable chair should be
and how it should function.
45e256779e684a2b84a86e49fc2e6f68
In the attack was included
the rules for the good item–
56aa1fe686f844b889aa28f403370760
–hindering designers
from doing what they wanted.
22bd96e936c64dbcb98d5f5d8d76405a
This liberated something.
1b54af5036544544bb6e50f8184e4b4a
And you can perhaps say
that it liberated something exclusive.
aaaa52ba2ae64bdf803d51c69a51b492
It was actually a sculpture assignment
we had at Konstfack.
4e86484eb2d344878c9263f89c281e91
So I set out and manufactured it
to the carpentry teacher's great dismay.
c6088ac8b8c34970b021e88efcea178e
But it became a concrete chair anyway,
in the end.
4f7f65193d0340c5bf0ee3d94775acb0
And I showed it
at the furniture fair in Älvsjö.
3780d4ce719447a09fde34ec518ec2c2
Most other exhibitors
said loudly:
96632b0ecc31498581749bd1e2a543c2
"Throw out those long-haired types."
6f6e159df5ad4b119e92696f022f6138
Except Sven Lundh,
owner of Källemo in Värnamo.
c5195fde2afc46a4a0146f5105a3f561
He became fire and flames
when he got to see it.
d5757181eb844cf7bc2881ac15003085
And we agreed that he would
manufacture a limited edition–
4ed00a5ed5894416a9097bbe0ec1d292
–which didn't exist among furniture
or objects at the time.
cd0f2350c7f543d0a1c88618df1b7d3e
It was more graphic sheets
that were made in limited editions.
073e53a0b1904035964ce0b063f04cff
I got Excellent Swedish Form,
an award–
de3fe50b9fcc4d3f947d2f07f012b229
–when there was an exhibition
at a gallery in Kungsträdgården.
387d0ca42d6944d7bb2b508583f8ea0b
During the award ceremony, half booed,
and half applauded.
5528bf34405844e7b8612c8946a18909
Already then it divided the
design establishment into two halves.
daa969c6b0844b2daf02aa7086568d73
Then I think it took off.
fe495614ca1a403198564f5ce2a6df69
It is equally important to embrace what
is ugly or not as beautiful–
521e18fd8029404e8d2e6059d1fe7daf
–and use it
in your design and design.
310e010345fd4c9a930388d6c19cfc6c
–Are your furniture beautiful or ugly?
–What do you think?
ef1fb688c971458aa0ed045cad2deced
I think it's interesting
with something I react to–
b936493b5f2443968fddf94854e22e27
–instead of something
you just walk past.
c296a59cffbb44f2a3a2803a559e4a87
To get a meeting in the object
with the beautiful and the ugly.
7c9da03aafe84244bfe7d3efc114dbda
That they booed when I got the prize is more
joyful, because then a reaction is created.
53c14c8a0ff24b6c95b04c22426e54da
No one was indifferent,
and indifference is the most boring.
86c76b453e6b4dbd88f21bcc0c52da2c
I have never experienced criticism as
burdensome, but amusing in a way.
0f69ab7296604f549c209f55c423e5a3
The limited, signed editions
set in motion a market–
5107fc651e0c46b6a56ec1c6d6709ae6
–for new design furniture that approached
the art world with exclusive objects.
938a03fe2f6a4d86bc2bb13eeeeb4de2
It would be glass shelves,
so that it felt exclusive–
0123526d6d214b4a915fac1228826b3e
–and that you got a surprise.
ecc1a30bdf364655aa29f7d32ec57059
And so it was
the rusty sheet metal on the outside.
fade9e140ea9429eb3bbce0002674d81
We had a different name for it first–
6c2586e46f144d68a821830c2cbed54c
–but then when I was on my way home, and
the bus driver called "Slottsbacken"–
ad2a264bfa0748ed87fea801fe69122d
–I thought it wasn't so bad.
It's still a slope, storage.
3c660aa8518c413d8fda5c94b762e61f
And it's a bit anonymous on the outside,
just like the castle.
5aeb5e4555f7484f89267db28bc770ea
Jewels when you come inside.
eae5cc0f3bf04f4ca9c9f7a8433ad9dd
It got the name Slottsbacken, which
was unexpected for such an object.
6de12c597e654c4a94d69f90feb68d54
Knut Knutson at Bukowskis in Stockholm, what do you think–
b9f71ae86d854e50957698043b56b2a7
–about Jonas Bohlin's cabinet's chances
at your quality auction in 20 years?
42b7f1b8cf4d4740b1bd02f94db65509
I think his cabinet has great
chances to become very appreciated.
364ff6958b7f4cd4b44141f31a926c51
This is a piece of furniture
that in a high degree shows our time's style.
ea26a4a2e71348b2ae6e64301c6a0582
It is often a prerequisite for it to be
appreciated in the future.
14514e24333e45e7be7b9acc8ec1f03a
Every piece of furniture should reflect its time.
2caf297b213b4675998fa5488fec3be0
The problem is always to know–
f623fe4383cb49d09bb9e7144c59e473
–when you are in the moment when new
design is created–
322b5b20d21749a7b586a763976c128b
–if it will be typical of our time
when you look back.
4b58bdb6acfe4082aedba9a48fd56281
But this feels to me extremely
advanced, new and dramatic–
d213ba68694a465aaff99a7412559bd3
–and it is very much just those
aspects–
c4f84ed6173a4af0aea56232862ba916
–that are important
in these contexts.
b28a2ec7adb04425b24f5385e6fae542
The time would give Knut Knutson right.
0a567a6d40db4c429ac88cd2a85b58a0
And the price, then? Today Jonas Bohlin's
cabinet sells for 350,000.
0ece08b30cfc45a3a63a20fa055f39f3
And Jonas Bohlin himself,
he owns no copy.
fab891a35c2c42faa28d0bd12b271ec1
It has better value appreciation
than gold and such.
ac7d712ea9594edfb73fb5ac623d96bc
I have other things to spend money on.
99be5918e3cb4b49a869a86954d5f4d5
I don't need to own
everything I've made, not physically.
b5371636c0a248c2b04a52b771b463e7
I own it anyway, in my soul.
fda743cc63e343fd9890966d1dc1e33c
A time after the concrete chair
follows Källemo with more successes.
d1faefb488a94830aec682244d6b6529
The young designer Mats Theselius
makes armchairs in aluminum and iron–
a495405d562c41c8bcf9c94ec6e7d221
–which today are seen as iconic.
But then they created confusion.
5fc66e26f789418b91964ad67ffe00b9
–Are they furniture or art?
–It's a sofa.
2e8f64b6f967418d98ae85080de97012
They set out to make a new category
of people with a lot of money see–
09e39f7099914be7aa999974e45c1ae8
–that interior design
could be an artistic expression.
6038069601ae4d73ade416886b69bf0d
Now affluent people discover that
interior design has a second-hand value–
80c0892918804e08b664ca9b4bab1b20
–and that
helps auction houses with.
38439009866f45f3a9c01e1e6fcf9571
Suddenly old Aalto chairs
are sold for incredibly high prices–
a21d9b337a3c4bf2b65fee0d111faaa0
–compared to what they cost
when they were new.
e4bb401b48264b689cf97cabc89b67f2
39,000. And 500.
2742ac60637240d48a3924189f322004
And the price increase spreads
to the entire North.
31dc7715fc1a49d18186fc98f9260c62
It was an upswing
for Norwegian designers–
52d082f95bb140bf8221d4f4f30c2c2f
–because they too became a little liberated
by Memphis and the development in Milan.
be6121b4477e4203a97538eb3df4b34
And they had an affluent audience. It shows
for example within jewelry.
75c144fe10904f9b9ebd73068a0a3bfe
In Norway writes a young female
silversmith in the design history.
d00dd12043e74affbcbc3abcb305fa27
Tone Vigeland comes from one of
Norway's most famous artist families–
161128788c3a491fbaf707171c14fca5
–and broke through when she was 17 years–
ddbe4feb29ad43a3a4956cb0f153ab00
–then she made the earring Slynge
that attaches to the ear without screws.
bab0438deb7e45d8ae63b1bfa2c287c4
At the same time as she was an artist
she was a craftsman, a smith.
9d03620836c344dd8f3fdaf8ad21bb05
She thought not with her hands, but
she thought with her hands in the material.
c2e1702c93b64469aa84dfae91c1ee7f
And then things grow.
9ee3c38ff3284fbe844f507cbe308a67
In the early 80s makes Vigeland
jewelry that causes a sensation.
97e1c101c2dc4a3a819b35a7642a4eec
She creates them from hand-forged nails.
ac5ce0c5e8f44d52b52e7538f4522eb5
The reason she started with nails
was that she got some nails as a gift–
0990e31da63847b1ab3afa0f485fe885
–from some acquaintances who were restoring
a house built in the Empire style in Bergen.
d1abddd96f874048324edebfe005daf
They knew she was interested
in metals and experimenting.
6b63f32c577c4c418a7ce5aecbbdc0cf
It was completely new,
and it got a huge breakthrough.
77a6a126b01a43be87e86890ec882815
Vigeland's specialty was jewelry
that forms itself after the body.
cca9b791c4ac41c1ac9cc63cc8648e7b
When she started with the nails
she hammered them completely flat–
50742811212e451eb47cc161da92dd0f
–and hooked them tightly
next to each other–
8fa60f1860084b469af64cfe8920e719
–into a fine-meshed net
that follows the body's forms.
db2d64fbd8874607bad761e2810b9b3d
Buttons or loose swarming
silver pearls cover the entire surface–
27d156c40b6d4ec2abd5a43b0ca5e23a
–and give the jewelry a unique structure
that resembles light feathers.
4a7a4274363d414583df705248b13429
She was perhaps part of the trend
with experimental jewelry–
ee620bf54585480d916fe2bb10e99ed7
–that existed at the time.
06c0bf87ec6a4ae491428e67ccaa35c3
At the same time they were very strong,
craftsman-wise.
d385d0889876434f83d8ada5fe14aa8a
Just like the numbered
and signed design furniture–
8823985076844a428668e617fa757eb7
–Tone Vigeland's nail jewelry
is made in a limited number.
06ac22d84f4c40e9885ae072af1da6a6
She made fine things,
but the nails ran out.
35565c73b4ac4b6a9d94602b5a4967a6
And she made no new nails.
Then it was over.
dd25cf4e664449ea9c6304c31a9aad51
Tone is uncompromising,
and everything must be...
682d7306399e4fd183230190a5c9d5b3
...exactly as she wants it.
888ad4f3f34447318eab4d819982013e
Then it doesn't matter
how long time it takes.
79f621b4df0747e983506b3448cee349
It takes long time to be a smith.
7eb12d3c3daf4d47be83cd70a28fcf8f
And to be uncompromising.
7ff7b628ab2c454e97e35061067eb845
And to be an artist.
a637623971b04530837072465ed25947
That was Tone.
82c6b30572d347b0a59ffef9b7a12495
In the early 80s is
the Norwegian design scene in change.
276665fb34fb4e299380f0f6418c1781
1983 gathers a group of young designers–
b882537c572544d3955c86dd8afeef05
–to bid farewell
to the Scandinavian design heritage–
889c3ee1932049b38cff5e40d164a792
–and they perform a manifestation
in central Oslo.
66471d052e3a465fa729a7237e30b5ee
What was seen on a beautiful summer day–
135fc863b1e445e78b0164b03dd3e841
–was a procession
down Karl Johans gate.
890e3e51eefe48318979d674df4d26a1
It was a large, black limousine–
806733e230b0471680120f51e472e37c
–and on it was
a large white coffin.
9a02dfa48245492999e73ef8237eed11
On the coffin stood in large, black
capitals "Scandinavian design".
42103c3bb14542eaaad1beee18112ad6
So the actual burial took place in a
theatrical and suggestive way–
d809b0932f6d4874b87bbd61970874e1
–with wreath and everything in Oslofjord.
a388a47eb6da4c08b885847a9f1e014c
This was an example
of design activism–
03933d1d110d4dada556d2f8f6cb8a36
–a symbolic burial
of the concept "Scandinavian design".
a47a1aa6c9f446a481d0b6cea853828b
They meant that this concept,
these ideals were outdated.
f3df60e354eb4a3392195c4b75a7acaf
This was a reckoning
with the design establishment.
c6f028c34de9410b9ce9fcb327af35d5
The Norwegian design scene is turbulent–
c73ec2841a324a6080acfb380551fa42
–and now breaks through a designer
who stands for optimism and vitality.
07161e06f5704b20991e01f6f5c23738
Terje Ekstrøm
succeeds with his chair Ekstrem–
82021eadf2454664b9df4072f9e1fc9e
–to redefine how a chair
should be used.
9c2d95f0f22a4b99833ee4f6ae7643bd
It is two different seats in the same seat,
and two different heights on the back.
8fe33b76b817412384b39f30f9c4cd1b
So you can sit with support for the thighs,
but you can also stretch out your legs.
0eb18738e87444e1a61bee3cff8c8259
You can thus vary your sitting position.
a0a7cc63bf8940e49461baaa31e64e3a
This means that it is easy to get up,
because you get your legs under you.
1ccdea6c17f4457f85c744200811a04b
And small children can go in and sit,
instead of sitting like this.
b38821f3f0b94fc8900dd2784dbca1aa
Furniture designs in the 80s in Norway
had a liberating lack of respect–
a1695d8a690348e3943eeae5775e8eda
–for the old gods
like the Dane Arne Jacobsen–
8c33c656cfb440a490c2006634d1d45c
–or the Swede Bruno Mathsson.
4fd1fbd6caa04cb991493501f7547e7e
The main idea behind the chair
was freedom of movement.
7872678dde2b4a8cb14f8884efb6e621
Terje Ekstrøm has himself told–
fe84b45705db4dc181e84f46975d325a
–how the chair was based
on his own experiences.
9de15cc6fa4842919fff65b3fcadbe2f
And he got very often heard
as a child: Sit properly, boy!
49aaa7f73d0b4d46af9c82e416a9a58f
So here we have a chair
that represents something completely different.
1c33d308dfef4577b7255641f353f423
He has himself told
how he took a gem and shaped it.
adeb2ffff7f149a9931060a8383ec183
And it was with the help
of this simple gem–
40286f99d8f345839a9e760ae9481164
–that he found
the Ekstrem chair's form.
1a83e40db28e4953bfb8a0b2e10aff7d
If we look at the actual form
it is very distinctive.
c76441230b3b432abbd4d22dcfc7cfb5
It is almost like a spider.
d144e21d720c4e94b56548a3c54f9c56
The upholstery is a knitted stocking.
34648b76d5ea4b0bb59532c4a3b2fe91
And Terje Ekstrøm was actually
a knitter as a youth.
5c8454bbc9134db19064eaa81dc8c27c
So it is really
his own experiences–
c8e31d5b137e4fd58a3ff9a1b9ae530c
–that are embedded in the Ekstrem chair.
e0518c2c50eb4e7296b58ebb1a4b3bda
It became a real media favorite.
3c6aaed1b4ba4d4e885d3ac8f6cff336
And not only among media,
but also among architects–
3a3aeabcfb694f3581b08b431b00df75
–and museums that acquired it
to their collections.
3829cfeb81254383ac1d783a07f4293c
And in the mid-90s
32 pieces were acquired–
7be6ba11e9c14f9ab677679a8eff1b03
–to the TV series Star Trek Voyager.
49356e0a07724f21846550849f7c45b1
And there it became
quite an important prop.
9e447945739f44d7a8a594d34c75fc6c
He belongs to a generation
that called a chair–
06170ab27fad4595b7294e4b863f8541
–a sitting tool–
a9af11faf86945ebb176fb19f888648d
–a generation that tried
to redefine what exactly a chair is.
8d23292e7c7c4b238a14e4f7c4c9d214
This, my ladies and gentlemen, is not
as you might think a modern sculpture.
d83896c4b1fd483fae312521228f2e9d
But it deals with art, furniture art.
Norwegian furniture art.
bba132bdacac4b07986bc23c68892d02
And it is actually not impossible–
001833b998db4d1da756586ce0c6ddb0
–that within a few years
we have such sitting tools at home.
bc15c5779f074c0390de779c296d8537
Another designer who calls a chair
a sitting tool is Peter Opsvik–
7bdb9da10c0848dab8e544cd2616c173
–who in the 70s made
the children's chair Tripp Trapp.
d498c06516474f91b56c5d56b6ed474e
Now he creates balance furniture for adults–
46cee1893ddd49a7a5eaec14a4c0e668
–and in 1985 comes
the unlikely chair Garden.
fdc460fa01d74122b88d8e3e7975092b
Garden also poses the question
of what a chair actually is.
570c1d2d6da544d99f6f71380b472d6b
It is ergonomic, but looks most like an
installation and borders on art.
4ae56e1608ad4e1e80694c98b5ae166c
–It is a very comfortable chair.
–Yes.
b39ee233194c4213851bcc0cf00ed5b4
–It can be used for all sorts of things.
–Norwegian...
d57767e18b75439c9c4343b80ca4199f
–Norwegian furniture is comfortable.
–You have heard about Scandinavian design?
f06453ff53db40179786a760e6bc2850
That is just it.
e3b451596bf74326abd589d0fdc6beaa
In the late 80s is the yuppie era
in full swing, and technology is in focus–
728c28b22adb4d9a93cb03f04d065ff7
–also in homes.
1b08d5d02aaf4539bf774d872f9bc63e
In Denmark gets the exclusive Bang
& Olufsen an increasingly important role.
ea82bf91de704a27bd0ff41aea2bbaf3
And there is
a unique design philosophy.
1a4ad1c7c8b14af896ba53c256c88820
Other radio products
in the 70s and 80s wanted to have–
07b9db9449764b9d8318717e8e06465c
–as many buttons as possible
that lit up and blinked.
bd8c177919db41159028708fd5df3e0d
Then Jacob Jensen said:
"If they do that, we do the opposite."
7c1cf73f0bed4d768059a5b09308e178
It should look simple,
like something from the future.
52ba2894b4294bdda20611e367caa807
Jacob Jensen's idea was to go against
how advanced technology should look.
c2bfa56082524562a23d245389f0d005
Instead of visible buttons
the technology's exterior should be "clean"–
b72276b74a3c4aad8238434c1ec1920f
–and the functions hidden
under the sleek shell.
26d0f22cd87443e59f5eeccf382856dc
1986 comes a stereo that will become–
311135e6e1564a5a8f5f2f5271ebd6a4
–one of the 80s home's
foremost status symbols.
5fa7bae739e64ccabd70de24ae0f5e1d
Jensen is in a way very Danish
and part of the "Klint school".
3700ce7165304742b7e15583c0623d60
He went to the furniture school here.
6e8ba6821bae4874bc01d248cfbaf80c
He lives up to the demands the Klint school
had with the perfect proportions.
d07e5b81769249ce8d6c064e624fd19e
But he is also an American
designer who thinks commercially.
3fe4772229594e1bb7d1a64a19411c26
He means that you should build in
a surprise and seduce the customers.
a63d31b7a11a4892af5a4d98cb1754ff
And he is innovative and wants to make
something that the world has never seen.
a2de31cf2b1f4566ab283797572ab80a
In the 80s spreads the design interest
out and becomes almost a lifestyle.
e65dd5faf4834ab3b024c57913379ffd
And now arises a trend
to create restaurants–
aafba960f9474e71bd0b07a1561ee430
–where the interior
is as important as the food.
0fedc750a7cd4b868cf2f739a0d881a9
And one of the first
is designed by Jonas Bohlin.
56a6a4c2daab49a08ace18514125c94a
I like this environment
that is both public and private–
85ac475dc58346b495ef3aadda21a576
–where everyone is welcome,
and people mix.
44118e6d6b2b446fbb6a1a5260ca739e
It is important in a restaurant,
that you can be yourself.
9768fee7d0bf4c0a8cc2e5061b4051c3
Jonas Bohlin creates Rolfs kök
together with a young student.
e5fe39adbc3a413184bbe61bd6053506
I was going to architecture school
and had not taken my degree.
3bfe9c5bf23c44b3a24def5f017b1f2c
Then I met Jonas Bohlin.
2cd57b977dd94656a8988fc09331934b
Jonas was already a superstar then.
e2386c28a8644e62b89f63c4c240d5a4
Jonas had gotten an assignment from two
guys who wanted to start a restaurant.
9f395a1585614359ba2419a669d10e26
"Will you help me draw it?
I have so much to do."
2c75fe25a0b14d9790822bd355f709c6
"Absolutely!" I was full of enthusiasm.
49c32786416245849c9e0b60362073b2
I drew like crazy on that
restaurant at home at the kitchen table.
b0f4a7b22c934293afb195f34291285e
No one had any idea that it would become
a design icon.
1c9cd7b0487844818789589d2b20ac06
We just did what appealed to us.
b69e0b0c2e564a77abc6646880c21126
Natural materials
– stone, wood and plaster.
bd152fa4992c444db54bf61636b518ae
We have plaster ceilings
and quite simple lighting.
93dc3a7b82c7432b91ab653c3862d0d5
The style is influenced by the
American Christian shaker movement.
30d2ab3e2484407d9d0662d6b08b52a6
They combined craft with function–
6cdaa79e350f46b8b87271ca3bad14e2
–and to create more space
they hung chairs on the walls.
0474517f6295482a9adfc60765009d11
At that time
I had also become interested–
2cb4b53c6d1d463fb561138f85fa77b4
–in the Swedish building-
and design tradition.
7caca7d4dd7a498cae400bdc4674235f
Much focus on Dalarna.
1f070e97ae32443b9dd77e74747a2fac
The blue color that is in Rolfs kök
is Dala blue.
c3597ed7994246e787d867e2bba0619a
Very much Sweden and the
traditional way of building–
570f90a615c84b75b9125e7ebe9f68b3
–with exposed boards
and clear screws.
e46a4237326949328b9bc97b43420984
Coarse details,
roughly as if...
d7d03f24a4a44eeebd8aa881edb9ce31
As if a farmer in Dalarna had screwed
up some hooks on a wall–
55330c3b1663458abd306291468a4fe6
–it could have looked
like what we did.
8899af14eb8d4a00a2002d2cebedfe75
But we did them as a decorative
but also functional element.
07bab457a323444386b9a457325ea23e
–So.
–It will be good.
ce04937e6e6d47c592abe6dea3dcf271
If it is both brush-painted
Leksand blue paint and Dala horses–
895fb89f7d414bc8bcd09cb7dc76d5a0
–could one call it
modern Swedish folk art then?
bc550af93a264a1184a6a6d678dce6b3
I think it is an addition
to the 80s design, what we lacked.
b74c4f599e974555b484c6157a6c18d6
The little...
a6bd9bec95124b8a80d9aa8a1b281b04
...little...
c554ba094d104b8e9cdf372fdadf3e45
...horse showing
that everything started there.
bfd0b20566454037b054ce6af13c686e
I also made a Dala horse cabinet.
60e9cabe33af48be83fe614e0708eac3
I made a regular cabinet in pine
and put on a door in lead sheet.
d81dada7e01947339628bf6a12cc432a
On the door's front side I wanted to
add an element of something–
5a99c937a92b4b9686bbba959938777e
–that had to do with the Swedish
folk culture.
ec0aaabc32df438b8dabf72b7fd6f2cf
I have placed the horse there
to get a kind of sign.
e56211beec75427d914b01f03297a59b
–Do they know about...
–No, I haven't dared to tell them.
c0e2d67b3c824b92baf3d8e150c39a2f
During this time in early 90s–
c1f7de9246144a27bca2cf0314c1a61d
–emerged new entrepreneurs
who wanted to make new restaurants.
886f9a68e52a456b97b9b9afc7767b65
And then the design became an important part
in marketing their restaurant.
da04996915684c2e8dba0216bb085ae5
Food, interior and design
became important.
3959af6743774a5bb771d25c882b3984
It was a kind of beginning
of the restaurant boom.
19d8d37ffa7b4e62bc69548412b2c77f
A restaurant today with self-respect
has an interior that is thought through.
18f63c5229fa4337920cab6132739adb
It is still the same furniture
that hangs on the same hooks.
d2426c1302344cdb80449a5b0658cc1c
It is only the guests and the food
that have changed since 1989.
f91cef59c604463996db2cc71b8ca194
Today many look back
on the 80s playfulness–
b71ed1e4dcd34f0dba90f4168013e881
–and are inspired by the humor
and freedom that was seen in the design then.
998325f5a68747428b5bd5569041ca94
What we are obsessed with with the 80s
and 90s is a nostalgic dream–
601ccabcb499475c9149bc2bc64a5c4f
–about a home, about adulthood and luxury.
b464df96f06b42cf9405913ea4b1433f
I like old Ikea catalogs
and how furniture was presented then–
9a14f6fc06c84e0f983e9a84bfa30678
–because there is a special style in them
even if they are inspired by other things.
898b36d0ff5a49fba39039509ee9a1bd
So Swedish homes looked like that then,
or one aspired to that.
63ff9d136451466596e55252f405cf6f
When you look in those catalogs
with your inner child's eyes–
56526627b4eb452d9d93bb3d8d8ad763
–I remember how it was to flip through them
as a child. Promising.
0f248163d9034a098a59c931808b0cce
It was fantasy-inducing
to imagine yourself as an adult.
92b4b1f7252640c2a3c807542fe72f10
"So I can have that with my children in
the future, and have a nice such."
42c86ca814d0406a99d359469b495343
I cut out the product images
and made collages.
0ded34bfbcfa48b0b2f7a88d65cdef82
It feels fun to honor
the inner child's wishes.
0df8fd22c0124c2f9ccc7f7a5070857d
"No burdensome middlemen.
Lower warehouse costs."
1cd886372bcc4ba2997fd9d9f43a33e
"You contribute yourself
by going to our stores."
29ae51cb76d14616be8e605d43f8567
Here is our favorite. So people don't think
a bookshelf should look like that now.
f65f98b494ff40deb71ea81d5e15bce3
It should be custom-built.
2fe3e4917edc4dd5846f89667ea1b5c9
Then mirror walls...
7b25f0782cb34525909b32c78f5129d8
You could compose your own,
and there was also an oval.
294d098fcab1496f95a40ac6efbe4e00
The same spread,
and we were on "decoration".
889db9fceaa9470a9e022009a2c8d773
We had it just recently.
8fa456056ba34e90944a6eaeb2c30985
Here we have Konfetti, the candlestick–
4a7a4274363d414583df705248b13429
–designed by Anna Efverlund
for Ikea.
855e720193e047bfa58982733d2eb711
They are hard to get hold of.
I have made my own, Garbage Memphis.
49f7edaeedaf476aa743cbd63a62cfe3
They are made from garbage,
the last in the drawer at some flea market.
a936ced8b9a149478a15d915d061299d
The idea was born from
wanting so badly to buy one–
dc05dbe97fbd40288eaa0859980afcdf
–and scouting on Tradera,
Blocket or at auction houses–
219f1d258e5b44d19daabe679dc30545
–but they always ended up expensive.
41b124be619f4777ae3d284c6ca6df55
So I started making my own.
ba0656b5bb704066857a4baf2d300ace
I would like to ask her about how
the work process looked at Ikea then–
42fcd79d92be4a188dec0795578a2df6
–and if she has insight into
how they do it now.
3669c1d34ff0463d985998e6738ecbf
It is extremely interesting. One
wants to hear how involved they were–
8f9668f334814b14971fdf197f081d97
–in wishing a certain trend,
and how much freedom she had.
e9ab190b1433414db7cef9305fea969d
–They are so extremely Memphis-coded.
–The timing is exciting.
dc795230d0f444468d8d8c4088c04176
Yes.
84cd7071a8f94a679d0038ec568363e0
The designer Anna Efverlund
who made the candlestick Konfetti–
d54d9a672134479f9c9b601f6abd6329
–came to Ikea as a designer
in the early 80s.
7d610c6d0f2543da86b974e59f7679b0
The design world changed quite a lot
in the early 80s–
97e574682ff64f4c873a4b77ab197784
–when Memphis presented
their exhibition in Milan.
efdd76e8c4804517829c3df5a1b88b69
I became so incredibly happy.
0fc8e220d8ea4258a8800bbb29e58cbe
The 70s were brown, orange
and a bit boring–
a3645dfa7c8e4e058f4bcc14e33deaff
–but now came maximal colors and cool
patterns. It was wonderfully delightful.
50dcccfd530a426f89c5800561f20258
It doesn't have to be so beautiful.
It should be a bit character.
4e7d80698a144689838cf83862c4db5c
It can be a bit: Wow!
5a556e9d944e4979851a3615c356f9b9
Hello! I stand so well here.
cf17692309084b2eba7e4382fb853438
–What you were tall and stately.
–Thank you.
5565eae1981c440199ead696a8a3f129
–And what beautiful you are.
–Thank you.
d38b3e16334a4e298f3a79e8532b28c8
Wow!
aad10dded74844b4a8dcac9040255574
Here is my guest room.
1109208e43554c5cb79abe6e13861467
I have dressed the beds with Sven
Fristedt's fabric that is now re-manufactured.
db0dc409034243fba88074d3039b7687
We go into the studio.
cd26f4150dc7432c86c4015d649dd236
I have the sewing studio there upstairs, and here
I have brought out some things.
e1c612183484454b991d75725d7f2cea
–A whole buffet.
–I started at Ikea in 1980.
d4ebaba47c384a4895bc992e172ef5e3
This was the first I got to
draw, a hanger. Bagis.
944934d9e4464fa496a191eccd213b3e
And I am so proud of it,
because it is still in production.
1821a764bb664d8d8fead05561dafe80
And when I searched in my hiding places–
55d20267f5a041928d1cadb26c32c3fb
–I found this picture.
13de7a1a07b849fdb699e6c544544560
This was the first project. There you see
that I painted with spirit pens.
4f0ea8bf2af14b46894a8f6d462ba6db
–God, what you were cute!
–I was sweet...
e8caff5fe7164396a058d2362feaaf52
Today when I searched for the picture,
I found Memphis posters.
28980e5beb37477e8186eae670b84030
–They are so cool?
–Oh, my god!
fc78606c7c114bc9b933ef3a9da8ddcf
This is from...-81.
be04cf5e0894435f8a865732dbf94973
–Did you go to that fair?
–Yes, I was down in Milan.
a836841a1ed64dd0bc86814401e435f8
I had started -80,
so I was there -81 and -82.
910ee26b42cd4869973d044d18c0fda7
One got energy and dared to make
patterns. One dared to mix things.
a4aac58049324226be3f69445b49531f
That is what is delightful. One feels
that this was the start of something new.
c8e6bce97ff34d208bd7b8a36e144800
When one came back, one thought
that we must find something new.
9b11a352e054466a84d0c5beee52ad00
So it was the starting point for much.
291fe236ec60451ba29852c356af8729
All in all Memphis... It is so exciting
that it was in the early 80s–
98bb84ff54eb41928a174ed334a6081f
–but that it had such an effect of it
in 20 years time.
ca1f7f481a394df5b171e7f0f3d7ebcd
I wonder about your time at Ikea.
46bb6ab32cad4789a4986824789c5352
You feel so boundless and expressive.
f958b9e65f394bb4a44a040d3196fbf4
I recognize myself in that, with color,
that one can take something and make something.
f74bd3326e9645a49e87c346b90f773f
Was there ever: "I thought
this." And they said: "Remove that."?
048cc54ef9b54d40aa1f1a2971a318aa
So it was all the time, very much.
ae67d7277ef2431e93592d3e93418ee8
From the beginning I got to do more
as I wanted and come with ideas.
83c2e945d3b744f1aa06e78efcea178e
But then one got a very narrow frame
to work within.
ed68a2b3aa9342879ee91ab130762284
That was price and if we have materials.
d5282f6b267f446894f69de0865ad756
So it was different style groups that
had different colors from year to year,
0aa87045891a44c18c3247c05411750b
Then one had more to go by.
"These colors should be used there."
379438675b36451d9afd882eac930a0f
It became more and more controlled the longer
the time went and the bigger Ikea became.
74407e54c3174441830c3b437990008d
Both Fiona and I feel that there
is still a creative freedom.
d12382e4ee0a4e1ba6f39a415e207d23
I can sketch down what I have,
and then maybe I get an assignment–
21a8169a58de44c0ab6829ee88c89aee
–and then I can push in the.
I can't just come with an idea.
e7af5ba6021147a1a4eee4db31d1444b
–Do you like that process?
–It is dreadfully exciting.
774e8d6844b54da5906aacab81df32b2
I love working in a narrow frame–
8b39ea484deb4f8d9414a31b92fc5c24
–because then one gets to be so creative
to make it work.
865ab30a108b444e9580c3c1565883c4
I think I love it,
but that is when one gets burned out.
5d165c596c3d4c3cad24b9bf0200975a
I did too.
b2d4ef90a645483c9493d4d6ca4e11b0
I have made copies of your candlestick
Konfetti, but they are not alike.
0515f7f9a7a846e5ad167984cd859f36
–This little one.
–God, what cute!
3be2ea4ca0874695b901d061b1f646e9
–It is an Ikea candlestick in base.
–God, what cute!
df379b6107714b378339ce91474cb02e
–I have just painted the pieces.
–It is so nice.
08e4c40aba634d54820fa47205432041
–It resembles the one from Memphis.
–Exactly.
1373ff44a08b4348b423c11b7e2bd742
With the striped. It is so beautiful.
b3168d5138e14abb8470f7b8c8014ef0
In the late 80s it was actually...
06b91ecd894c438d85eb7f311c0ad1d0
...a reaction against Memphis.
3490bd98302d4be88f642fef529446a5
It was an English designer
named Jasper Morrison.
673531ed6fd24ae39415a929b439b206
He made a small exhibition
where he tried to settle with–
1037b059bf5b4804ad66f9f6320e173a
–all too much expression
in postmodernism.
b2e7ceaab5c04f7f8ca7d2044d012011
He built up a small room,
a quite spartan room.
01f4f1a2a2da46be85472d9763b22ab9
It contained a table, chairs,
some bottles and not much more.
8f6822694e3448d2be7b3de89786aadc
It was the story of the little old woman.
Her room with chair, table and stool.
630f6afae2484920be403be4c533e054
I happened to stand there
with a group of young Swedish designers–
e92a83b1560b42c399acb08cf2ec8ffd
–who became pale in the face
and thought that they could have done that.
b073aa9374034112b1de9aaf92460d2c
Some who become significant for
the new minimalist direction–
dc39483b8c99486b844ee960a1a607c8
–are three Swedish students.
0ab57f0a2e8444e8a15c3e97a6f57f72
We studied at Konstfack together,
in the same class–
3bb3a0d6b3d243c3a54f558410f5c25a
–and became quite immediately really
close friends. Real pals, like.
a2a179cf5634455ea126b9548b3e023f
We felt like a band.
f1465af44abd470dad637d8ac192a58d
What we create together is so
much bigger than one individual–
38b5290a6c294a5294db924d3c67315e
–and it is an incredible feeling.
ff5f9472cbae478eb90ec92f11a799d8
They get a breakthrough
already with their graduation work:
88c916eea4c74b8fb08dec02c14dbd76
A fully furnished house on 60 square meters
that is set up right in Stockholm.
adea7c4c1f194fa1b918fd71224893e2
Villa Wabi was an idea about finding
the total, almost sacred calm–
e34cc164808843edb448825650546f99
–in the worst possible urban environment.
279aa46c91574b2ab336fabcb592606d
Can we create an oasis
where one hypothetically at least–
2ace3fac7d96463393360c5987d0c60e
–could live privately and quietly?
c1c6f02a6bbd422c9bda11840a12e907
At that time when we did
the graduation work there was–
31280e347bcb4f6ab6405aea7205a4f0
–a postmodern style ideal in Sweden
that we were not so fond of.
7a36c8277370494cb94277c007d68da3
We thought it was mostly gestures
and a bit too fashion-oriented.
5dcd471db7bb449c9f2a6fa00c795575
We were interested in
"less is more"-aesthetics–
81434a9fd8c647e18fd90002d399f77b
–so we made this house
that was our interpretation of–
4247d5f5cd534879b5c241758754bc58
–how a Scandinavian take on it
would be.
d1f5798458674e62b90627a9a8c493f7
What we were fascinated by
when we started our career–
d56ac3c93d47412a93eeb24d9c2813b8
–were the big Scandinavian
designers and architects–
fc3d0ebdda644a3397768fc82d8a5cfd
–like Arne Jacobsen and Alvar Aalto
whom we thought did right–
c9ac222ccc19424d969de0a383daeb1a
–in working both with architecture,
interior and furniture.
7b02f8e4b02947d48c9dfea2ecc45ac7
The trio becomes the epitome of the design
called minimalism.
3af2429883bd485198a08aace03b0571
But that concept is not a word
they themselves would choose.
72cdc6de8635426ab5a2bfc2704e7048
Minimalism...
It is quite interesting.
ce93a28c9981457896469607512ca54c
No one who has practiced – architects,
designers or artists–
b8146990c18b40638b91030418d6a32f
–no one of them likes the word, and we
are not fond of it either.
d051118c961246b784f5eab30f296b92
But when people enter rooms
that are a bit more sparsely furnished–
7d8082d7e6a74214af7ad3bdd9f226c8
–they almost always lower their voices.
f01c2a9b42f54ce7986eb918f180b439
I think it creates
some kind of free zone–
e709040d5be94ddc9bed5d6ed3741061
–for almost all people.
a4273672a3cc43449859b6856d5df454
Actually, it is the same thing
one seeks–
4517b2cdeff14216931b47380287608b
–as a creative person
has sought in all times.
80221d667fab41faa5e2ffc797e5bf76
It is to find an essence in something.
b9dcbf6dd9e24b708871c37e37976e8c
Then the rebirth of minimalism
in the 90s–
22545e284bd9422f9fe094a34d29fcf0
–was a reaction to an 80s that was...
70390072ee5f4143a876c119cbb8e0cb
–Full of excesses.
–Yes, it was really messy.
a588747dae3348bfb10976e116690332
In the late 90s they create the
residence for the embassy in Berlin.
e244405172784a7898ea1b4d118dc61b
The idea with the ambassador's residence is
to show a vital, young Sweden–
6e9bad70360e4c9e9b496e9dad2dea03
–specially within design
of objects and furniture–
4152d01a0c31440f9efed2a94296e3b6
–that actually exist today and
are noticed in the rest of the world–
1d6116eb467f47b68c6516cf0bfba3a9
–but which we are not so aware of
here at home in Sweden.
bd059c5f27ff4920870a93c98314b91d
What we did was extremely avant-garde.
It was that and then.
3500ce7165304742b7e15583c0623d60
The normal is to look at the country's tradition.
c46bf1a543464685ad4561b29fe15da8
It would have been Josef Frank
and Carl Malmsten.
50627d17848e4610a417a23027b2e49c
They are nothing wrong with them, but they were
longer back in history.
dbcf407dfc8743dcb983cbaa2e96676
We wanted everything here and now,
and since we got to do it–
e36099163e7543c4afd2c82cf22323b1
–it is almost a museum
over Swedish 90s design.
028b06cfaf1a4bbf9367651f64367a69
Minimalism
also becomes strong in Finland–
0d042fe7ad864a19ae289ff33975e3ed
–and 1997 breaks through the young designer
Harri Koskinen–
74bb0543364e48ecab838c6237219854
–with Block lamp
that becomes a real design classic.
b01040311b3f41dd91c4edd3fcf19f2c
I came home from Milan yesterday,
and it was an investment.
dd9771c3bad44b2e85a1b2954f43115e
It cost a lot
to go to Milan and show things.
fc0ac4661ed84e4795d0edf0629d75d0
With drinks and parties, but I think
it was a good timing.
891f68e6572f460d9ff2e5bd5468ab61
In New York in the 90s lives the
Finnish designer Stefan Lindfors–
d87e8a3c73cc416c8b98d40ccb2f3018
–who has just broken through with
the insect-like Scaragoo.
f4e8b5456810446b95a396e329eef4cc
One day he gets
an unexpected call from Helsinki.
2915084c1ea84dc3901fa0c5f390394f
Arabia contacts me,
current Iittala, and says–
ce954d169bb6468f8ee47394a3d0d6d3
–that they want to do a collaboration, that
I should do a product for them.
258ca302f67f4a4a8f5b2a688993c84f
And I became so glad,
because it was in the beginning of my career.
2e8c6e78d577442f9d881ff80c9bbcbf
I flew to Helsinki, met
product managers and was on fire.
907fbfd1552946a29bb9bb3f6b0fab24
"What have you come up with for me
to do?"
74651924f77c4db7a5406198404e24bf
"Well, we have thought very long
and seriously about this"–
98e5fc288bac4d258f32f4ead3b68403
–"and we would like
that you do a coffee cup for us."
1e1984742a2845a683d3e79834dc5945
"No, but what the hell?"
I was almost having a heart attack.
17044011bf394453a7ead77a46ad6d19
How in the world do you make a coffee cup
that is different from a coffee cup?
11ab81adbc6544fe868ab775ab7f5b3c
If Alessi had asked me,
it wouldn't be a problem–
e67f16fb121c40c3840a1ed5e62a4280
–because their price policy is different.
Then the coffee cup could cost 500 euros.
c68bb3e86aba44d89ff78e345b0c5e2d
Then you could put a chip in it
that sings "Good morning" or something–
b73febd1d5aa43d58684def5307505a6
–but now we talk Arabia, and it should
be a product for normal money.
ff04b32c888c4b5c965f70c7c1bfeaa5
So I said it was impossible.
088b3e273ee040f48844b78441adca2e
Flew back to New York,
and was on a very wet party–
543fa03e2a2e4843a3d3ecd9531b68ba
–and went home
at six–seven in the morning.
839b6d0dd9fb4e498771b5ad60116c3b
Cigarette in left hand, and felt
that I needed a coffee – fast.
e95153da77834a42ab1ba7e90a33c928
So I sit there with the cigarette
in the corner of my mouth at a small table–
1231359c08ed4664810fa466fc5507a4
–and then they come with a half-liter
bowl full of boiling café au lait–
1c5e262c5ae74667bcf573e3153b8d2d
–And a small handle.
4ad6adc6ea384468943538260402ad31
And I tried, but thought
I would get the coffee in my lap–
b878861b2418431eb0118062317c1668
–and that would be
third degree burns.
9790872f87ba4519b4c6f4ed92849cf4
So I came up with that my coffee cup
should have a handle, but be nice.
b56f92308b1746fdb5c558713afead7d
The way to it
became more complicated than expected.
4eff6e24f5cb4545bc8d67ca1a9200d8
The handle was burned off first
in the ovens–
4a07830eb7794cf6836f84258b6f814b
–but the problem was solved
by the technicians on site.
daacc41d2a5145afa180b651b082f360
It is proof of a competent industry
that stems from my homeland.
21842d92d13d493cabeab6058f688ac6
There is a pride over a
collaboration between a Finnish designer–
c76272c4256140a9a2958c1598cbf131
–and a Finnish industry
where one has succeeded in making something–
472bbfb8de334ae39564d510e39c0931
–that did not exist before
in a world that is full of junk.
8ace74e0a1ee4b86823e44783c821ee3
On the second half of the 90s
comes the internet–
dad78ed0ca884f18a642dac2bca2227e
–and a new need arises
of furniture, with the computer in focus.
8ffe54651f7143229851947bfbd57b3f
The Finnish design collective
Snowcrash surprises the whole world–
6d031830f7234e4e8931ab2a6b3483ab
–at the furniture fair in Milan 1997.
584d7174716c418dabfe05745387a5ab
Snowcrash arose in a time
when under the recession in Finland–
2a6719da209444d4bddec6c0f1be8162
–had begun to arise
a positive entrepreneurship.
a93f5531167c4a2795281e7d3d3fcc0e
But in practice there were no jobs
for us young designers and architects.
b48208d1568d4374b0830d9652800453
Everyone had a pc or Mac at home,
a quite large personal computer.
4ce7c1420c884beaab05f86fe751b84a
Suddenly everyone had homes and offices
with gray boxes with cords.
a87bfaa65a7b424788e03c94d61f6fde
People sat and worked
in bad postures.
087fdefcc4c844e38eeb7b3b993c78f9
In homes the computer was used for
entertainment, and the gaming world grew.
f489d04218194f3f9dd1196cd4599c0d
The furniture designs in the 80s in Norway
had a liberating lack of respect–
2033ec61727e4ec7b99c2be14ce2fd43
–for the old gods
like the Dane Arne Jacobsen–
d7266c765be84976a21488675ad8d384
–or the Swede Bruno Mathsson.
7e36cd1f77c741cb9491a0df18bec23e
The main idea behind the chair
was freedom of movement.
2ec3ab8b4b4f4077989a8f292cbbd3d6
Terje Ekstrøm has himself told–
ef6d49108ada4f36b3a30204743b94c5
–how the chair was based
on his own experiences.
5e7cbf8e4d60498bb78a8d77bb96e884
And he got very often heard
as a child: Sit properly, boy!
085956bfe1ff48e6a21ce848f85a215b
So here we have a chair
that represents something completely different.
19b7e1950cb14ff3a807599d7f191c7c
Netsurfer became talked about,
and today it is sold at auction houses–
17bb09f1735d4e60b67851fc3103821f
–as an iconic object
from the internet's childhood.
296288145ca64cf8b8749f7668e7ece3
They are children of their time, such as Netsurfer.
That makes them interesting.
82951deb25f14604bb98d7efd419055f
The objects are not only
what they are physically–
8a99e8626feb4f7e9975a47cb769d6d6
–but they also encompass
a thought about something.
9b0c6ac302ec4bd3a076dff262e704ac
But the design collective Snowcrash
disappears as fast as they came.
a237b5f7cae04bffbd11bde31f02ef17
The company is sold,
and the designers split–
9b0c6ac302ec4bd3a076dff262e704ac
–but their functional
and artistic design lives on.
0d1c83df94ab48e5b0ad18c72ccc9a8f
In Denmark the legacy of the
great masters has long lain like a lid.
d38b915cbc534d82ab9e179fa955484a
It has been difficult
for new designers to get forward.
e1f8806bde3046a68bb64569dee8f9a7
But towards the end of the 90s comes a
young designer who succeeds in breaking through.
9fb7c4ad88de455484f717b312195f88
I came in from outside. I am half-English
and grew up in London.
477310b6591f425d87b4583025872908
I am educated in Denmark
but have always had an outsider feeling.
f48165d977f043509e9447827ff1e475
That can have been a big advantage–
265c073d9f3e4a10a341ad362cbfc627
–if one is to get into the closed room
that is Scandinavian design tradition.
c7d225640d1a4257aa9adaaf913e144a
When I graduated -95
I was at a furniture fair.
70581698b0b247988c0de747f533433f
All were touchingly unanimous.
b77fae480db44fa5b68ed1809d853036
We had control over this,
the Scandinavian "we". Everything was calm.
e054a3609b4f4c50981700fa4471fdae
Why fix it if it ain't broken?
People love us.
771f31501b124c1a90eca577aec50717
Everyone was so self-satisfied,
and it was extremely provocative.
dc9ff1d4375548f5a96d9523bfaffd0b
Especially for a young person like me
who thought:
68919dcc21dc46fcb25f7b375e948a65
"I don't fit in here. Why in the hell
do we just do as we always do?"
306cf5f498a5450183f26810573082ef
My generation's male predecessors–
332c73babc164dfba47a5df1ad3dfda3
–have been lovely to fight against–
78928737c2c3459493a5d9b0cb0a45c8
–but on the other hand...
d734710e41e54811b679cf5d1c402f65
It has always been about that we should not
touch it, for it could not be done better.
08c6236039664e1f848bff0612697a4c
If we are to contribute something,
we have to go another way.
d42a0ae8b757452d87794bd531fdfb23
Louise Campbell breaks through
with an unusual wardrobe–
0d60b50dc5424194a67f70cf852c8b12
–a new kind of closet
that should stand in the middle of the room.
07d5adeeb2c4493894998c0e31b44dde
The henslængte klædeskab came to be
because I got sight of a competition–
c5d512721abf4feba83801ee352bb985
–where one of the judges was Nanna Ditzel.
1ff9ed78eff546fe986d71be1c736be6
She is my great role model,
so I took the opportunity.
ce753d1b6f5245c7b137491125b13db0
I thought it was time
to settle with–
8ee19d0b7bfd411b88a72b2d77179eac
–the extremely conservative view
on how to store clothes.
038f9584ad754941a6a03f845c2366fd
The thing with the closet was to say...
396ac969dfa04b3c9b2a73bad4fc62f0
...that young people's active lives
do not fit–
9093152025ca4e34a8234dfbed63f9e6
–to have the clothes in nice cabinets.
165fe9e1a1c0437e856f0dd622641b28
One wants overview on what one has,
and one wants it to go fast.
24aa47836d714e5fbbdd989430f43a72
So let the furniture reflect
mine and others' reality.
bc66afa9428b49098b0dd11478494320
Louise Campbell won the competition,
and 1996 starts her own studio.
54a7899a72ea4c42a7de35ed09f0ff06
Her idiosyncratic expression
becomes a take on Danish design.
a7390ff16e9d4d5fbb118c0bb08fde14
The outsider became an advantage, placing her
right in the design scene.
d38178142ad64471bfc75c025d63b158
Since the millennium shift
and on the way into our modern time–
699da3fbf80f4487925f3da72c4a4187
–she has made some
of Denmark's most acclaimed furniture.
54228c89f0c14855b092ff0e2b44ad8a
The typical for the late 90s
was that one embraced the diversity.
05eb69859156493ebefe32345357e992
Everything possible could work
and fit together.
3cb9f02f68f84e00902e207fd0401993
You just have to go into a furniture store
and see–
7fdd8b884692445baff11d4c2bc90ee4
–how classics and new models
are mixed big on the market.
7fdd8b884692445baff11d4c2bc90ee4
We are still in postmodernism with different expressions.
cda56b5c65b0481cb7d4dbdd371aa1dc
This is tufted pieces
that we have embroidered on.
51701657dc71449981a803f2a7c7193a
Can the world be saved? What creates best
possibility for all of us to have a good life?
249e81169bb7476da48364ef82950cdf
I have wanted to change the world,
so that no young woman should be ashamed–
c15ab91b9fef45969230c0668c41b17a
–and that has been worth everything.
c4fe92630a9049b1b5e879dee97d0d9a
Translation: B Bäckman, J Tegnborg
Subtitles: Jenny Tegnborg Svensk Medietext för SVT
a59e5b7bfe2e455bb3979015bd51fca5
Textning: Jenny Tegnborg
Svensk Medietext för SVT